CONTRIBUTING.md, before:

# Contributing to opentelemetry-go-compile-instrumentation

The go compile instrumentation SIG meets regularly. See the
OpenTelemetry
[community](https://github.com/open-telemetry/community?tab=readme-ov-file#implementation-sigs)
repo for information on this and other SIGs.

See the [public meeting
notes](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1XkVahJfhf482d3WVHsvUUDaGzHc8TO3sqQlSS80mpGY/edit)
for a summary description of past meetings. You can also get in touch on slack channel
[#otel-go-compt-instr-sig](https://cloud-native.slack.com/archives/C088D8GSSSF)

## Development

### Prerequisites

This project uses several tools for development. Most tools will be automatically installed when you first run the corresponding `make` target. However, you need to have:

- [Go](https://golang.org/dl/) 1.21 or later
- [Git](https://git-scm.com/)
- Make (usually pre-installed on macOS and Linux)

### Getting Started

1. Clone the repository:

   ```sh
   git clone https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-go-compile-instrumentation
   cd opentelemetry-go-compile-instrumentation
   ```

2. Build the project:

   ```sh
   make build
   ```

3. Run tests:

   ```sh
   make test
   ```

### Available Make Targets

Run `make help` to see all available targets:

```sh
make help
```

#### Build Targets

- `make build` - Build the instrumentation tool (includes packaging)
- `make install` - Install the `otel` binary to `$GOPATH/bin`
- `make package` - Package the instrumentation code into a binary archive
- `make build-demo-grpc` - Build gRPC demo server and client

#### Code Quality

- `make format` - Format all code (Go + YAML + License Headers)
  - `make format/go` - Format Go code only using golangci-lint
  - `make format/yaml` - Format YAML files only using yamlfmt
  - `make format/license` - Apply license headers to Go files
- `make lint` - Run all linters (Go, YAML, GitHub Actions, Makefile)
  - `make lint/go` - Run golangci-lint on Go code
  - `make lint/yaml` - Lint YAML formatting
  - `make lint/action` - Lint GitHub Actions workflows
  - `make lint/makefile` - Lint Makefile
  - `make lint/license` - Check license headers (has dedicated CI workflow)

#### License Headers

All Go files must include the proper license header. The license header configuration is defined in `license.yml` which handles exclusions for vendor directories, temporary files, and generated code.

To check and fix license headers:

- **Check license headers**: `make lint/license`
- **Apply license headers**: `make format/license`

The license header checker has a dedicated CI workflow (`check-license-headers.yaml`) that runs automatically on pull requests and pushes when Go files or the license configuration change.

#### Testing

- `make test` - Run all tests (unit + integration)
- `make test-unit` - Run unit tests only with formatted output
- `make test-integration` - Run integration tests only with formatted output

Test results are saved to `gotest-unit.log` and `gotest-integration.log` for review.

#### Documentation

- `make docs` - Update embedded documentation in markdown files

#### Semantic Conventions

- `make weaver-install` - Install OTel Weaver if not present
- `make lint/semantic-conventions` - Validate semantic convention registry
- `make registry-diff` - Generate diff between two versions of semantic convention registry
- `make semantic-conventions/resolve` - Resolve semantic convention registry schema

For detailed information on managing semantic conventions, see [docs/semantic-conventions.md](docs/semantic-conventions.md).

#### GitHub Actions Security

- `make ratchet/pin` - Pin GitHub Actions to specific commit SHAs for security
- `make ratchet/update` - Update pinned GitHub Actions to latest versions
- `make ratchet/check` - Verify all GitHub Actions are properly pinned

#### Cleanup

- `make clean` - Remove all build artifacts and temporary files

### Development Workflow

A typical development workflow looks like:

1. Make your changes
2. Format your code: `make format`
3. Run linters: `make lint`
4. Run tests: `make test`
5. Commit your changes

For a complete check before submitting a PR, run:

```sh
make all
```

This will run: `build`, `format`, `lint`, and `test` in sequence.

### Tools

The following development tools are used and will be automatically installed on first use:

- **[golangci-lint](https://golangci-lint.run/)** - Go linter aggregator
- **[gotestfmt](https://github.com/gotesttools/gotestfmt)** - Prettier test output
- **[yamlfmt](https://github.com/google/yamlfmt)** - YAML formatter
- **[actionlint](https://github.com/rhysd/actionlint)** - GitHub Actions linter
- **[ratchet](https://github.com/sethvargo/ratchet)** - GitHub Actions security pinning
- **[embedmd](https://github.com/campoy/embedmd)** - Embed code in markdown files

## Pull Requests

### Conventional Commits

Pull requests made to this repository are expected to use the [Conventional Commits][conv-commit]
specification. Specifically, pull request titles are required to follow the specification's title
format:

```
<type>(<scope>)!: <description>
╰─┬──╯╰───┬───╯│  ╰─────┬─────╯
  │       │    │        ╰─ Short description of the change (see below)
  │       │    ╰─ If, and only if the PR contains breaking changes
  │       ╰─ Optional: change scope (e.g, 'cmd/gotel', `pkg/weaver`, ...)
  ╰─ Required: commit type (see below for accepted values)
```

This repository requires using one of the following commit types:

- `chore` for routine repository maintenance that has no impact on the user interfaces (CI/CD
  operations, linter configuration, etc...)
- `doc` or `docs` for documentation changes
- `feat` for introduction of new features
- `fix` for bug fixes
- `release` when cutting a new release
- `refactor` for code changes that do not add new features or fix bugs

Please try to keep the commit title concise, yet specific: they are used to derive the release notes
for this repository. A good litmus test for whether a pull request title is suitable or not is to
determine whether a user would be able to determine whether this change affects them or not by just
looking at the title.

Here are some examples for the various supported commit types:

- `chore`:
  - :information_source: What's changing in this PR? This should provide enough information from a
    maintainer to make sense of what's going on.
  - :white_check_mark: `chore(ci): add OSSF Scorecard automation`
  - :x: `chore: new CI step`
- `doc`, `docs`:
  - :information_source: What documentation has change? A user might decide whether they go read it
    or not based on this.
  - :white_check_mark: `docs: explain proper use of the -log-level flag`
  - :x: `docs: improve documentation`
- `feat`:
  - :information_source:  What feature is being introduced specifically? A user might decide if this
    is useful to them or not based on this.
  - :white_check_mark: `feat(cmd/gotel): -log-level flag to configure log verbosity`
  - :x: `feat: logging`
- `fix`:
  - :information_source: What bug is being fixed? Refer to the symptoms of the fixed issue, not to
    the solution. A user might decide whether their problem is solved by a release or not based on
    this.
  - :white_check_mark: `fix: SEGFAULT on when cross-compiling on linux/arm64 platforms`
  - :x: `fix: check pointer for nil before dereferencing it`
- `release`:
  - :information_source: What version is this commit preparing for?
  - :white_check_mark: `release: v1.2.3`
  - :x: `release: new release`
- `refactor`:
  - :information_source: What code is being refactored?
  - :white_check_mark: `refactor: remove unused code`
  - :x: `refactor: improve code readability`

[conv-commit]: https://www.conventionalcommits.org/en/v1.0.0/

### How to Send Pull Requests

Everyone is welcome to contribute code to `opentelemetry-go-compile-instrumentation` via
GitHub pull requests (PRs).

To create a new PR, fork the project in GitHub and clone the upstream
repo:

```sh
git clone https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-go-compile-instrumentation
```

This would put the project in the `opentelemetry-go-compile-instrumentation` directory in
current working directory.

Enter the newly created directory and add your fork as a new remote:

```sh
git remote add <YOUR_FORK> git@github.com:<YOUR_GITHUB_USERNAME>/opentelemetry-go-compile-instrumentation
```

Check out a new branch, make modifications, run linters and tests, update
`CHANGELOG.md`, and push the branch to your fork:

```sh
git checkout -b <YOUR_BRANCH_NAME>
# edit files
# update changelog
git add -p
git commit
git push <YOUR_FORK> <YOUR_BRANCH_NAME>
```

Open a pull request against the main `opentelemetry-go-compile-instrumentation` repo.
Be sure to add the pull request ID to the entry you added to `CHANGELOG.md`.

Avoid rebasing and force-pushing to your branch to facilitate reviewing the pull request.
Rewriting Git history makes it difficult to keep track of iterations during code review.
All pull requests are squashed to a single commit upon merge to `main`.

### How to Receive Comments

- If the PR is not ready for review, please put `[WIP]` in the title,
  tag it as `work-in-progress`, or mark it as
  [`draft`](https://github.blog/2019-02-14-introducing-draft-pull-requests/).
- Make sure CLA is signed and CI is clear.

### How to Get PRs Merged

A PR is considered **ready to merge** when:

- It has received two qualified approvals[^1].

  This is not enforced through automation, but needs to be validated by the
  maintainer merging.
  - The qualified approvals need to be from [Approver]s/[Maintainer]s
    affiliated with different companies. Two qualified approvals from
    [Approver]s or [Maintainer]s affiliated with the same company counts as a
    single qualified approval.
  - PRs introducing changes that have already been discussed and consensus
    reached only need one qualified approval. The discussion and resolution
    needs to be linked to the PR.
  - Trivial changes[^2] only need one qualified approval.

- All feedback has been addressed.
  - All PR comments and suggestions are resolved.
  - All GitHub Pull Request reviews with a status of "Request changes" have
    been addressed. Another review by the objecting reviewer with a different
    status can be submitted to clear the original review, or the review can be
    dismissed by a [Maintainer] when the issues from the original review have
    been addressed.
  - Any comments or reviews that cannot be resolved between the PR author and
    reviewers can be submitted to the community [Approver]s and [Maintainer]s
    during the weekly SIG meeting. If consensus is reached among the
    [Approver]s and [Maintainer]s during the SIG meeting the objections to the
    PR may be dismissed or resolved or the PR closed by a [Maintainer].
  - Any substantive changes to the PR require existing Approval reviews be
    cleared unless the approver explicitly states that their approval persists
    across changes. This includes changes resulting from other feedback.
    [Approver]s and [Maintainer]s can help in clearing reviews and they should
    be consulted if there are any questions.

- The PR branch is up to date with the base branch it is merging into.
  - To ensure this does not block the PR, it should be configured to allow
    maintainers to update it.

- It has been open for review for at least one working day. This gives people
  reasonable time to review.
  - Trivial changes[^2] do not have to wait for one day and may be merged with
    a single [Maintainer]'s approval.

- All required GitHub workflows have succeeded.
- Urgent fix can take exception as long as it has been actively communicated
  among [Maintainer]s.

Any [Maintainer] can merge the PR once the above criteria have been met.

[^1]: A qualified approval is a GitHub Pull Request review with "Approve"
  status from an OpenTelemetry Go Compile Instrumentation [Approver] or [Maintainer].
[^2]: Trivial changes include: typo corrections, cosmetic non-substantive
  changes, documentation corrections or updates, dependency updates, etc.

## Approvers and Maintainers

### Maintainers

- [Huxing Zhang](https://github.com/ralf0131), Alibaba
- [Kemal Akkoyun](https://github.com/kakkoyun), Datadog
- [Liu Ziming](https://github.com/123liuziming), Alibaba
- [Przemyslaw Delewski](https://github.com/pdelewski), Quesma
- [Romain Marcadier](https://github.com/RomainMuller), Datadog

For more information about the maintainer role, see the [community repository](https://github.com/open-telemetry/community/blob/main/guides/contributor/membership.md#maintainer).

### Approvers

- [Dario Castañe](https://github.com/darccio), Datadog
- [Eliott Bouhana](https://github.com/eliottness), Datadog
- [Haibin Zhang](https://github.com/NameHaibinZhang), Alibaba
- [Xabier Martinez](https://github.com/txabman42), Cabify
- [Yi Yang](https://github.com/y1yang0), Alibaba

For more information about the approver role, see the [community repository](https://github.com/open-telemetry/community/blob/main/guides/contributor/membership.md#approver).

### Emeritus maintainers

- [Dinesh Gurumurthy](https://github.com/dineshg13)

For more information about the emeritus role, see the [community repository](https://github.com/open-telemetry/community/blob/main/guides/contributor/membership.md#emeritus-maintainerapprovertriager).

Commit message:

chore(ci): automated release process (#253)
fix #252 

It looks something like
[this](https://github.com/y1yang0/opentelemetry-go-compile-instrumentation/releases/tag/v0.4.0)

CONTRIBUTING.md, after:

# Contributing to opentelemetry-go-compile-instrumentation

The go compile instrumentation SIG meets regularly. See the
OpenTelemetry
[community](https://github.com/open-telemetry/community?tab=readme-ov-file#implementation-sigs)
repo for information on this and other SIGs.

See the [public meeting
notes](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1XkVahJfhf482d3WVHsvUUDaGzHc8TO3sqQlSS80mpGY/edit)
for a summary description of past meetings. You can also get in touch on slack channel
[#otel-go-compt-instr-sig](https://cloud-native.slack.com/archives/C088D8GSSSF)

## Development

### Prerequisites

This project uses several tools for development. Most tools will be automatically installed when you first run the corresponding `make` target. However, you need to have:

- [Go](https://golang.org/dl/) 1.21 or later
- [Git](https://git-scm.com/)
- Make (usually pre-installed on macOS and Linux)

### Getting Started

1. Clone the repository:

   ```sh
   git clone https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-go-compile-instrumentation
   cd opentelemetry-go-compile-instrumentation
   ```

2. Build the project:

   ```sh
   make build
   ```

3. Run tests:

   ```sh
   make test
   ```

### Available Make Targets

Run `make help` to see all available targets:

```sh
make help
```

#### Build Targets

- `make build` - Build the instrumentation tool (includes packaging)
- `make install` - Install the `otel` binary to `$GOPATH/bin`
- `make package` - Package the instrumentation code into a binary archive
- `make build-demo-grpc` - Build gRPC demo server and client

#### Code Quality

- `make format` - Format all code (Go + YAML + License Headers)
  - `make format/go` - Format Go code only using golangci-lint
  - `make format/yaml` - Format YAML files only using yamlfmt
  - `make format/license` - Apply license headers to Go files
- `make lint` - Run all linters (Go, YAML, GitHub Actions, Makefile)
  - `make lint/go` - Run golangci-lint on Go code
  - `make lint/yaml` - Lint YAML formatting
  - `make lint/action` - Lint GitHub Actions workflows
  - `make lint/makefile` - Lint Makefile
  - `make lint/license` - Check license headers (has dedicated CI workflow)

#### License Headers

All Go files must include the proper license header. The license header configuration is defined in `license.yml` which handles exclusions for vendor directories, temporary files, and generated code.

To check and fix license headers:

- **Check license headers**: `make lint/license`
- **Apply license headers**: `make format/license`

The license header checker has a dedicated CI workflow (`check-license-headers.yaml`) that runs automatically on pull requests and pushes when Go files or the license configuration change.

#### Testing

- `make test` - Run all tests (unit + integration)
- `make test-unit` - Run unit tests only with formatted output
- `make test-integration` - Run integration tests only with formatted output

Test results are saved to `gotest-unit.log` and `gotest-integration.log` for review.

#### Documentation

- `make docs` - Update embedded documentation in markdown files

#### Semantic Conventions

- `make weaver-install` - Install OTel Weaver if not present
- `make lint/semantic-conventions` - Validate semantic convention registry
- `make registry-diff` - Generate diff between two versions of semantic convention registry
- `make semantic-conventions/resolve` - Resolve semantic convention registry schema

For detailed information on managing semantic conventions, see [docs/semantic-conventions.md](docs/semantic-conventions.md).

#### GitHub Actions Security

- `make ratchet/pin` - Pin GitHub Actions to specific commit SHAs for security
- `make ratchet/update` - Update pinned GitHub Actions to latest versions
- `make ratchet/check` - Verify all GitHub Actions are properly pinned

#### Cleanup

- `make clean` - Remove all build artifacts and temporary files

### Development Workflow

A typical development workflow looks like:

1. Make your changes
2. Format your code: `make format`
3. Run linters: `make lint`
4. Run tests: `make test`
5. Commit your changes

For a complete check before submitting a PR, run:

```sh
make all
```

This will run: `build`, `format`, `lint`, and `test` in sequence.

### Tools

The following development tools are used and will be automatically installed on first use:

- **[golangci-lint](https://golangci-lint.run/)** - Go linter aggregator
- **[gotestfmt](https://github.com/gotesttools/gotestfmt)** - Prettier test output
- **[yamlfmt](https://github.com/google/yamlfmt)** - YAML formatter
- **[actionlint](https://github.com/rhysd/actionlint)** - GitHub Actions linter
- **[ratchet](https://github.com/sethvargo/ratchet)** - GitHub Actions security pinning
- **[embedmd](https://github.com/campoy/embedmd)** - Embed code in markdown files

## Pull Requests

### Conventional Commits

Pull requests made to this repository are expected to use the [Conventional Commits][conv-commit]
specification. Specifically, pull request titles are required to follow the specification's title
format:

```
<type>(<scope>)!: <description>
╰─┬──╯╰───┬───╯│  ╰─────┬─────╯
  │       │    │        ╰─ Short description of the change (see below)
  │       │    ╰─ If, and only if the PR contains breaking changes
  │       ╰─ Optional: change scope (e.g, 'cmd/gotel', `pkg/weaver`, ...)
  ╰─ Required: commit type (see below for accepted values)
```

This repository requires using one of the following commit types:

- `chore` for routine repository maintenance that has no impact on the user interfaces (CI/CD
  operations, linter configuration, etc...)
- `doc` or `docs` for documentation changes
- `feat` for introduction of new features
- `fix` for bug fixes
- `release` when cutting a new release
- `refactor` for code changes that do not add new features or fix bugs

Please try to keep the commit title concise, yet specific: they are used to derive the release notes
for this repository. A good litmus test for whether a pull request title is suitable or not is to
determine whether a user would be able to determine whether this change affects them or not by just
looking at the title.

Here are some examples for the various supported commit types:

- `chore`:
  - :information_source: What's changing in this PR? This should provide enough information from a
    maintainer to make sense of what's going on.
  - :white_check_mark: `chore(ci): add OSSF Scorecard automation`
  - :x: `chore: new CI step`
- `doc`, `docs`:
  - :information_source: What documentation has change? A user might decide whether they go read it
    or not based on this.
  - :white_check_mark: `docs: explain proper use of the -log-level flag`
  - :x: `docs: improve documentation`
- `feat`:
  - :information_source:  What feature is being introduced specifically? A user might decide if this
    is useful to them or not based on this.
  - :white_check_mark: `feat(cmd/gotel): -log-level flag to configure log verbosity`
  - :x: `feat: logging`
- `fix`:
  - :information_source: What bug is being fixed? Refer to the symptoms of the fixed issue, not to
    the solution. A user might decide whether their problem is solved by a release or not based on
    this.
  - :white_check_mark: `fix: SEGFAULT on when cross-compiling on linux/arm64 platforms`
  - :x: `fix: check pointer for nil before dereferencing it`
- `release`:
  - :information_source: What version is this commit preparing for?
  - :white_check_mark: `release: v1.2.3`
  - :x: `release: new release`
- `refactor`:
  - :information_source: What code is being refactored?
  - :white_check_mark: `refactor: remove unused code`
  - :x: `refactor: improve code readability`

[conv-commit]: https://www.conventionalcommits.org/en/v1.0.0/

### How to Send Pull Requests

Everyone is welcome to contribute code to `opentelemetry-go-compile-instrumentation` via
GitHub pull requests (PRs).

To create a new PR, fork the project in GitHub and clone the upstream
repo:

```sh
git clone https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-go-compile-instrumentation
```

This would put the project in the `opentelemetry-go-compile-instrumentation` directory in
current working directory.

Enter the newly created directory and add your fork as a new remote:

```sh
git remote add <YOUR_FORK> git@github.com:<YOUR_GITHUB_USERNAME>/opentelemetry-go-compile-instrumentation
```

Check out a new branch, make modifications, run linters and tests, update
`CHANGELOG.md`, and push the branch to your fork:

```sh
git checkout -b <YOUR_BRANCH_NAME>
# edit files
# update changelog
git add -p
git commit
git push <YOUR_FORK> <YOUR_BRANCH_NAME>
```

Open a pull request against the main `opentelemetry-go-compile-instrumentation` repo.
Be sure to add the pull request ID to the entry you added to `CHANGELOG.md`.

Avoid rebasing and force-pushing to your branch to facilitate reviewing the pull request.
Rewriting Git history makes it difficult to keep track of iterations during code review.
All pull requests are squashed to a single commit upon merge to `main`.

### How to Receive Comments

- If the PR is not ready for review, please put `[WIP]` in the title,
  tag it as `work-in-progress`, or mark it as
  [`draft`](https://github.blog/2019-02-14-introducing-draft-pull-requests/).
- Make sure CLA is signed and CI is clear.

### How to Get PRs Merged

A PR is considered **ready to merge** when:

- It has received two qualified approvals[^1].

  This is not enforced through automation, but needs to be validated by the
  maintainer merging.
  - The qualified approvals need to be from [Approver]s/[Maintainer]s
    affiliated with different companies. Two qualified approvals from
    [Approver]s or [Maintainer]s affiliated with the same company counts as a
    single qualified approval.
  - PRs introducing changes that have already been discussed and consensus
    reached only need one qualified approval. The discussion and resolution
    needs to be linked to the PR.
  - Trivial changes[^2] only need one qualified approval.

- All feedback has been addressed.
  - All PR comments and suggestions are resolved.
  - All GitHub Pull Request reviews with a status of "Request changes" have
    been addressed. Another review by the objecting reviewer with a different
    status can be submitted to clear the original review, or the review can be
    dismissed by a [Maintainer] when the issues from the original review have
    been addressed.
  - Any comments or reviews that cannot be resolved between the PR author and
    reviewers can be submitted to the community [Approver]s and [Maintainer]s
    during the weekly SIG meeting. If consensus is reached among the
    [Approver]s and [Maintainer]s during the SIG meeting the objections to the
    PR may be dismissed or resolved or the PR closed by a [Maintainer].
  - Any substantive changes to the PR require existing Approval reviews be
    cleared unless the approver explicitly states that their approval persists
    across changes. This includes changes resulting from other feedback.
    [Approver]s and [Maintainer]s can help in clearing reviews and they should
    be consulted if there are any questions.

- The PR branch is up to date with the base branch it is merging into.
  - To ensure this does not block the PR, it should be configured to allow
    maintainers to update it.

- It has been open for review for at least one working day. This gives people
  reasonable time to review.
  - Trivial changes[^2] do not have to wait for one day and may be merged with
    a single [Maintainer]'s approval.

- All required GitHub workflows have succeeded.
- Urgent fix can take exception as long as it has been actively communicated
  among [Maintainer]s.

Any [Maintainer] can merge the PR once the above criteria have been met.

[^1]: A qualified approval is a GitHub Pull Request review with "Approve"
  status from an OpenTelemetry Go Compile Instrumentation [Approver] or [Maintainer].
[^2]: Trivial changes include: typo corrections, cosmetic non-substantive
  changes, documentation corrections or updates, dependency updates, etc.

## Release Process

The release process is automated using GitHub Actions. To create a new release:

1. Push a new tag with the version number (e.g., `v0.1.0`).
2. The [Release workflow](.github/workflows/release.yml) will automatically trigger, build the binaries, and create a draft release on GitHub.
3. Maintainers should review the draft release, edit the release notes if necessary, and publish it.

## Approvers and Maintainers

### Maintainers

- [Huxing Zhang](https://github.com/ralf0131), Alibaba
- [Kemal Akkoyun](https://github.com/kakkoyun), Datadog
- [Liu Ziming](https://github.com/123liuziming), Alibaba
- [Przemyslaw Delewski](https://github.com/pdelewski), Quesma
- [Romain Marcadier](https://github.com/RomainMuller), Datadog

For more information about the maintainer role, see the [community repository](https://github.com/open-telemetry/community/blob/main/guides/contributor/membership.md#maintainer).

### Approvers

- [Dario Castañe](https://github.com/darccio), Datadog
- [Eliott Bouhana](https://github.com/eliottness), Datadog
- [Haibin Zhang](https://github.com/NameHaibinZhang), Alibaba
- [Xabier Martinez](https://github.com/txabman42), Cabify
- [Yi Yang](https://github.com/y1yang0), Alibaba

For more information about the approver role, see the [community repository](https://github.com/open-telemetry/community/blob/main/guides/contributor/membership.md#approver).

### Emeritus maintainers

- [Dinesh Gurumurthy](https://github.com/dineshg13)

For more information about the emeritus role, see the [community repository](https://github.com/open-telemetry/community/blob/main/guides/contributor/membership.md#emeritus-maintainerapprovertriager).
